---
layout: post
title: "Bodysurfing Handplanes"
date:   2018-08-01
categories: woodworking
---

<img src="/img/handplane/18.jpg"/>

Handplanes are mini surfboards for your hand when bodysurfing (you only use one
at a time).  They give you a little more lift and help to get your head out of
the water.  I'd been talking to my dad about them, and thought it'd be a fun,
simple project to shape a couple.

<img src="/img/handplane/1.jpg"/>

I started off with 1" thick African Mahogany.  The shape of the first one is
based on my first surfboard - I stretched the width so the proportions would
make more sense for the size I wanted.  Then I traced that out onto the wood
and cut the template

<img src="/img/handplane/2.jpg"/>

Next I cut out the channels with a chisel.  Looking pretty good!  I later ended
up getting a cheap set of carving chisels, which made it much easier to clean
up and round those inside corners.  I woulda gone nuts trying to do that with
only sandpaper.

<img src="/img/handplane/4.jpg"/>

In retrospect, it would've been better to continue the channels all the way to
the nose, because I had a hell of a time blending them with the transition to
the front rocker.

<img src="/img/handplane/6.jpg"/>

After a lot of sanding

<img src="/img/handplane/9.jpg"/>

I stained an arrow into the deck to mimic the design of the original surfboard.
This ended up not turning out that great.

<img src="/img/handplane/10.jpg"/>

Two thin coats of linseed oil.  Beautiful!  I thought about keeping it like
this, but I wanted the UV and water protection that comes with spar varnish.

Incidentally, I read a [cool article](https://gizmodo.com/inside-san-francisos-fire-department-where-ladders-are-1552279252)
about the San Francisco fire department's wooden ladders, which they make
in-house.  Apparently they finish them the same way.

<hr/>

<img src="/img/handplane/14.jpg"/>

For the second hand plane, I wanted to do a more nebulous organic shape,
without the hard lines of the first one.

I couldn't find anything online about template shape or bottom contours for a
hand plane, so I just winged it.  For the bottom contours, I decided on a
convex entry, followed by a triplanar transition to a large single concave. The
template is a squashed mini-simmons/soap-bar sort of thing.

<img src="/img/handplane/13.jpg"/>

Most of the shaping was done with an old Stanley No. 5 plane, seen here in the
background.  A low angle block plane probably woulda done a better job.  Or
maybe a rasp.

I did this on one of those folding "workmate" workbenches.  The clamping system
works very well for this irregular shape, but the bench itself is super wobbly
- kind of a pain.

<img src="/img/handplane/15.jpg"/>

Here's the first coat of spar varnish on the first handplane, and the markings
to guide the contouring of the deck for the second.  It's mostly flat, though I
rounded the edges of course, and I tapered down the trailing edge to match the
bottom concave.

<img src="/img/handplane/16.jpg"/>

Finished sanding the second one.  I did the bulk of the concave with a sanding disc.

<img src="/img/handplane/17.jpg"/>

Varnish.  Love how this one turned out.

<img src="/img/handplane/19.jpg"/>

Here's a better view of the bottom contours

Screwed on some sections of a guitar strap, and that was it.

I was actually impressed by how much of a difference these make when
bodysurfing.  They're not difficult to swim with, and you really notice the
extra glide.
