---
layout: post
title: "Crib: End Pieces"
date:   2021-02-25
categories: crib woodworking
---

album: https://imgur.com/a/kbT3EiC

The crib has two identical ends and two identical long sides, which are bolted
together and made to be disassembled. The ends provide the main support for
everything - the legs are part of them, and the mattress support bolts directly
to it. I figured the fewer pieces to transfer the weight of the mattress and
baby to the ground, the better.

I started off with the legs, which have mortises to accept the horizontal
pieces, and a slight taper on the wide face at the bottom for aesthetics.

I marked out these mortises and removed the bulk of the material with a router.
You can see the top mortises are offset downwards a little - I did this to
ensure there was sufficient material between the tops of the mortises and the
tops of the legs.

![mortises](https://i.imgur.com/Q3nCFRm.jpg)

I squared these up with a chisel.

![finished mortises](https://i.imgur.com/Qxoa0Wo.jpg)

The router also made quick work of the tenons. This step went pretty smoothly,
though I did cut one shoulder slightly too deep. I made passes like this on all
four sides.

![thicknessing tenons](https://i.imgur.com/pVFb6m3.jpg)

I marked everything so it'd be assembled the same way each time, then carefully
did some final fitting of each corresponding pair with a chisel. A shoulder or
rabbet plane would've been really helpful for this. Here's everything dry-fit
together.

![frame dry-fit](https://i.imgur.com/eRhN4jr.jpg)

I free-handed the taper cuts on the legs with a circular saw, then cleaned up
with a jack plane. Unfortunately I went maybe 3/16ths too far on one, such that when the
horizontal piece was attached, the top of the taper was in the joint. I glued in
place some of the off-cut and cleaned it up so you can hardly tell.

![fix mis-cut](https://i.imgur.com/S1Bu1xD.jpg)

Next up was cutting slots for the broad panels. I tried doing a test cut in
scrap wood and found that a vertical router bit tended to wander a little, and
since I wasn't planning on any overhang, this cut would be visible and needed to
be crisp. Luckily I had this type of bit (a slot cut bit?), which cuts on a
different axis. This means any wobble would change the depth of the cut, not the
width, which is more acceptable visually.

I didn't have the stock thicknessed to the exact right width for the bits I had,
so did multiple passes at different depths to get the right width. If I'd had a
thickness planer and the foresight to match my material to my bits, this step
would've been much easier. I had the same problem with the slats, and fixing it
would've saved a ton of time.

![cutting mortises with router](https://i.imgur.com/tNY31cY.jpg)

Still, there was a little cleanup and fitting to do, plus I had to square the
ends, again with chisels.

![squaring long mortise ends](https://i.imgur.com/eJ5giaM.jpg)

Lastly, I cut notches off the edges of the panels to at least cover part of the
slot. Here's everything ready for assembly:

![ready for assembly](https://i.imgur.com/H8jPvdA.jpg)

And all glued up! I used thickened epoxy to make up for my "high tolerance"
cuts. It still needs to be evened out a little, with the adjacent pieces sanded
flush, but I wanted to wait until I had the long sides done too so I could fit
it all at once.

![assembled](https://i.imgur.com/XeizZ2z.jpg)
