---
layout: post
title: "Crib: Prepping the wood"
date:   2021-02-24
categories: crib woodworking
---

I was hoping to be able to build a crib in time for my son's birth. That didn't
happen, but I got it done by the time we moved him out of the bassinet, so I'll
still call it a success. This post describes how I went from lumber store wood
to thicknessed, smooth stock ready to build a crib out of, and how I designed
the crib.

First off, I did a ton of reading on cribs, in particular on US safety
regulations. These dictate a number of constraints like interior size and
tolerance, minimum and maximum rail height (with multiple mattress positions),
slat spacing, and some other things like maximum deflection, avoiding
protrusions at the top perimeter, no spaces that vary in thickness (an infant
could stick a limb in a wide hole and slide it down to a smaller one, getting
stuck). I also bought a set of plans from a reputable site to use as a
reference. In the end I went with something much simpler than those plans, which
tends to be my aesthetic.

It's a straightforward implementation of the recommended guidelines, with three
broad panels on each end, rather than 4 sides of slats (or solid end panels). I
made the legs part of those end panels (this will make it easier to convert to a
toddler bed later). After reading an academic paper (well, the abstract,
anyways) on rail height, I decided to make the rails about 3 inches higher than
they needed to be to meet the recommended minimum. If this ends up being so high
it's hard to get him in and out, I can always add another mattress position. The
slat spacing is just a tad narrower than the recommended maximum.

My lumber store only sells hardwoods in 3/4" and 1 3/4" thicknesses, neither of
which is great for what I wanted to do with it. The plans I bought used I think
3/8" thick slats, so I took that as a minimum for strength and rigidity (the
slats shouldn't bend beyond a certain threshold, lest a child be able to squeeze
their head or body through them like [Senator Kelly in
X-Men](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/x-men-movies-canon/images/9/90/K.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/555?cb=20121111160900)).
I decided to buy 1 3/4" lumber and resaw it into two thicknesses - 1/2" for the
slats and end panels, and whatever was left over (around 1 1/8") for the frame.

Here you can see my crowded, tiny garage. These three boards contain all the
wood I need. I went to the hardware store intending to get cherry for the end
panels and oak for everything else, but ended up spotting some jatoba next to
the cherry for about the same price, and there was a board the right size
already, so I wouldn't have to argue about getting it cut to length. Plus the
wood is beautiful.

![unprocessed lumber](https://i.imgur.com/6m86ms7.jpg)

Before purchasing the wood, I'd confirmed over the phone that they could resaw
it for me there in their mill shop. Turns out the person on the phone didn't
know what resawing is - they don't do that there, so I was stuck resawing almost
7" wide hardwood boards at home on a table saw with a max cut depth of about 3
1/2". I figured I'd give that a go, then at least bring them back to the shop to
be planed smooth.

I made the cuts in a series of maybe 3 passes per side until I made it all the
way through. I wonder whether it would've been cleaner or easier to do one deep
pass on each side, but I was scared to cut that much material in a single pass.

It was very challenging to hold the board precisely enough to keep these cuts
from wandering - minor variation on a half-inch thick board is significant. The
blade did deflect a little, but it wasn't too bad.

I sawed some of the oak in thirds (all for slats), and some into a thick and
thin portion (for the frame and for slats, respectively). All told, I got a very
efficient fit out of the wood.

![resawing](https://i.imgur.com/TfcvMGo.jpg)

I didn't think through the decision to go with jatoba instead of cherry. [The
Wood Database](https://www.wood-database.com/jatoba/) says:

> Jatoba is considered difficult to work with on account of its density and
> hardness, and has a moderate blunting effect on tool cutters. Jatoba also
> tends to be difficult to plane without tearout due to its interlocking grain.

Super. The jatoba was all sawn into thirds. Here you can see a bit of how rough it
turned out. There are some burn marks, but more crucially, there are areas of
varying thickness (note also my lovely, pregnant assistant in the background).

![resawing jatoba](https://i.imgur.com/YUGXMru.jpg)

At this time I took the wood back to the hardware store to plane, but turns out
it's stupid expensive, plus apparently they won't do jatoba, as it's too rough
on their machines. Hope my tools can handle it...

I cut everything approximately to length and width so it'd be easier to manage.

![resawn and cut to length](https://i.imgur.com/jtozgR0.jpg)

And here's the slats ripped to size. I actually processed these much later, but
am including that work here so it makes more sense.

![stock for slats](https://i.imgur.com/aeW7eTk.jpg)

The oak for the frames was great to work with, I was able to use my jack plane
to get a smooth, even finish - I just checked the dimensions regularly and tuned
it up until everything was about even.

![hand planing oak](https://i.imgur.com/TJnVTfg.jpg)

The jatoba was something else. I absolutely could not hand plane it, and I knew
aggressive sanding would yield something smooth but horribly uneven. I looked
into finding access to a thickness planer, but that didn't go anywhere, as this
was the early days of COVID. Eventually I realized I could just get a used
handheld electric planer, which actually worked out really well. I kept checking
the thickness with calipers and taking off more where it was needed, 'till I got
something pretty uniform.

After the power planer, I tried using my random orbit sander, but it was super
slow going. I ended up getting a sanding disk attachment for my 10,000 RPM angle
grinder and using that with like 40 grit paper. That was finally able to smooth
out the ripples left by the planer. Finally I used my sander and I think 4 grits
to get it to a finished quality.

![smoothing jatoba](https://i.imgur.com/NGfp4Nn.jpg)

This picture shows the surface left after planing vs a fully smoothed and sanded
surface.

Getting that jatoba all the way there took so much time, both figuring out _how_
to approach it, and actually executing on it.

![electric planer vs sanded](https://i.imgur.com/l0x5SdV.jpg)

The final stock prepping challenge was figuring out how to get that pile of
slats all uniform and sanded. I knew that I'd be putting them in a routed slot,
so they really needed to be the same size. Working in batches, I secured them to
some folding benches, then went over them with the power planer, then the angle
grinder, then the belt sander, and finally a few grits with the palm sander. I
had to do this for all four sides of each batch.

![assortment of tools](https://i.imgur.com/1fWPETB.jpg)

Now I understand how nice it'd be to have a thickness planer - that would've
saved me so much effort, and probably yielded a better result.

Since 1 3/4" was way thicker than I wanted for the frame, I knew I'd have enough
oak left over for either the slats or the panels. I wanted the panels to be big
and pretty, so I figured I'd use the oak for the slats. If I were to do it
again, I'd probably use the dark wood (cherry, ideally) for the slats too and
just save the leftover oak for some other project.

Also now I know to read up on any wood before purchasing it. That jatoba was
such a headache, sounds like cherry would've been much easier. Still, the
finished jatoba is gorgeous, and it's an incredibly sturdy, durable wood.
