---
layout: post
title: "Board Rack"
date:   2021-01-04
categories: woodworking
---

My dad has long his surfboards in a pile under a tarp in the back yard, so I
decided to make him a board rack for Christmas. This was a relatively quick
project - kinda nice to do a construction project instead of all the fine
woodworking I've been doing lately. Zero sanding!

I went with a free-standing rack, because I was nervous about attaching it to
the fence (I didn't know if the supports could bear the weight) or the house
(didn't want to deal with possible moisture penetration). This also means the
rack can easily be moved if necessary.

Even home cheapo construction lumber is expensive right now, and 2x4s are
largely overkill for a lot of the parts I need, so I decided to rip some 2x6s in
thirds for much of the material. I used full dimension boards for the main
structural elements - 2x4s for the vertical supports, and 2x6s for the base. I
played with a few options on paper and settled on this as a good way to make the
most of lumber in readily-available dimensions.

Here's everything ripped and cut to length. Man is construction lumber utter
crap compared to the hardwoods and clear pine/fir I've been working with. So
many knots and missing chunks, even in the best I could find in the pile. That's
probably why you need a 2x4 - to account for the defects in addition to the low
density.

![wood cut](https://i.imgur.com/NU7AI5n.jpg)

Each half is a vertical backbone over a base, with small arms for the boards.
Expecting them to sag, I angled the arms about 10 degrees upwards. The base is
attached with a bunch of screws, well spread out, since I used a 2x6 here. This
close to the ends of the boards, the wood had a tendency to want to split, so I
pre-drilled holes for each screw. I ran out of screws partway through, so I was
only able to do two per arm on one half, and four per arm on the other half (two
from the outside, two from the inside). After a few months of use, the two-screw
half is decidedly sagging, while the four-screw side is holding up fine. This
wood is so soft it really needs the extra fasteners.

I left a bit extra spacing between the bottom few arms to allow for boards with
large skeg fins. The verticals protrude a bit past the top arms to prevent the
top board from sliding off the back, and to leave something to attach a tarp to.

![both sides](https://i.imgur.com/2iBINyS.jpg)

Another approach I considered was to fill the gaps between each arm with 2x4s
sistered to the main support. This way the arms would also be sandwiched top and
bottom, which would help hold them up. Rigidity isn't important, just that they
don't pivot below a certain point. I probably would've done this, but it seemed
like overkill, and I didn't have easy access to a miter saw to make consistent
angled cuts.

I fleshed out the structure with some horizontal members, and a long diagonal
piece to keep the frame from going skew, which did a lot to stiffen it up. I
also added struts between the feet and verticals to ensure the main body stays
upright.

Here's everything fully assembled.

![assembled](https://i.imgur.com/4ABIjhI.jpg)

And here it is with boards in place! At some point I'll have to go back and add
extra screws to reinforce those arms, and maybe slap some paint on the rack to
increase its longevity.  For now it gets the job done.

![with boards](https://i.imgur.com/LYJdt15.jpg)
