---
layout: post
title: "Crib: Long Sides"
date:   2021-02-26
categories: crib woodworking
---

album: https://imgur.com/a/JfO60Zu

The crib is held together by bolts from the outside of the end pieces going into
the ends of the long rails. Screws lose a lot of strength when going into end
grain, since there aren't wood fibers running perpendicular to the screw to hold
the threads in place, only short, chopped fibers between the threads. To address
this, I made dovetail caps to put on the ends of the rails, so I could screw
into that, and the dovetail should keep it from ripping out (hopefully).

I rigged up a simple little jig to hold my slats on end while I run them over
the router table.  This worked well enough, but I wouldn't have minded something a little more stable.

![cutting dovetails on rails](https://i.imgur.com/XUPJ2KX.jpg)

The end caps were easier - I adjusted the fence to widen the slat until it fit
the dovetails on the rails.

![making end caps](https://i.imgur.com/oOIrrdO.jpg)

Here's everything cut, with the fit being fine-tuned piece-by-piece

![fitting dovetail ends](https://i.imgur.com/Hjz7UQ1.jpg)

Glued and sanded.  Looks pretty good!

![finished dovetail ends](https://i.imgur.com/1JpEWq3.jpg)

Rather than cutting a million mortises, I cut a long slot in the rails, and made
spacers to fill in the gaps.

![all pieces](https://i.imgur.com/JufWFwg.jpg)

Fitting all this together was a bit of a pane. Yet another thing that was made
much more complicated for the want of a thickness planer. With subtle variation
in the thickness of the rail, I ended up with variation in the thickness of the
slot, since I cut the slot from both sides. It would've been better to stick
with a single reference edge so I got a more consistent slot width, even if it
meant a minor asymmetry. There was also the problem of needing to fit each
slat's thickness to the slot with a hand plane, rather than finding the right
setting on a planer once and running everything through it.

![spacers](https://i.imgur.com/En1HOBF.jpg)

The slats are beveled, but since I didn't cut overhang in the ends, I had to
stop the bevels short. I came up with a dead simple system for stopping the
bevel at the same spot every time.

![beveling slats](https://i.imgur.com/FMeogYT.jpg)

Here's everything fully fitted together. The downside of the approach I used
(slats and no shoulders on the tenons) was that it involves a lot of exposed cut
lines, with a lot of epoxy oozing out of them. This was a _huge_ pain to clean
up, since it was all inside corners. It seems I traded woodworking for sanding
and scraping. Pretty sure I picked the wrong side of that exchange.

![assembled](https://i.imgur.com/zAt2i9y.jpg)
