---
layout: page
title: Birth Story
permalink: /birth/
---

Marta was 39 weeks pregnant on August 29th (due September 5th).  That day was relaxed and pleasant - I made Marta a dutch baby for brunch (she commented that this was probably the last brunch we'd have as a duo), prepped for a big dinner we were doing with friends (online, in this age of COVID and distances), and did a little work on the crib.  Marta on the other hand was in frantic nesting mode, running around the house, doing laundry, making sure everything was ready for the baby.

The dinner was West African themed, and we cooked sweet plantains in a tomato, onion, and sardines sauce, spicy chicken, peanut, and okra stew, a fermented sort-of tamale called kenkey, and little balls of fried dough (puff-puff).  Take note, if you're ever looking to induce.  We had a great time with our friends, cleaned up, and went to bed around midnight.  At about 2:30 AM, Marta woke up to contractions, and when they continued, she woke me up around 45 minutes later.  I was initially skeptical that this was it, since there had been no prelabor signs.  I pulled up _The Birth Partner_ to confirm signs, and saw the following "late pregnancy change":

> Unusual burst of energy resulting in great activity (cleaning, organizing)—termed the “nesting urge”

That checked out, and we had a good laugh.  We started timing the contractions, and right away they were 1 minute long, 5 minutes apart.  This pattern held for a while, and we realized we needed to go to the hospital!  I had been expecting a more gradual build up.  First Marta decided to video call her family.  I took the opportunity to load up the car, thankfully we had most everything ready to go, because I was a bit dazed (and very sleepy).

I walked Marta into the ER and started helping her check in, then went and parked and we went up to the birthing ward.  They inspected her, and she was at almost 5 cm dilation, which means we were there to stay!  All the while, Marta's contractions were increasing in intensity.  She said it felt like cramping, but that it wasn't especially painful.  That said, she was shaking uncontrollably this whole time, so I had my skepticism.  The medical team offered her an epidural, but she wanted to wait a bit longer.  Pushing on her lower back helped a lot with the contractions, which were by this point coming more frequently.  I was also trying to send out messages to tell our families it was happening, let my office know I wouldn't be working tomorrow, et cetera.  Even quick distractions like that were hard with the increasing frequency of the contractions.  Marta also really likes to be warm, so I wrapped her in blankets and a yak wool shawl I got on a trip to India, and put on an over-sized warm beanie that Marta loves when she's feeling sick.  The medical staff thought this was hilarious - no one had ever seen someone labor with a "ski hat" on.  Still, the contractions were a lot to deal with.

Eventually Marta did decide to take the epidural.  She'd been planning on doing it anyways, and there was some issue of when the anesthesiologist would be available, so we started before it became unbearable.  I had to step out while they set it up, and when I came back in, Marta was bundled snug in the bed, wearing an oxygen mask and a goofy smile.  She couldn't feel the contractions at all.  This made the next few hours a LOT easier than they would've otherwise been.  I'm really glad she took the epidural - while she didn't fall asleep, she was able to relax a bit and save energy for pushing.  She would've otherwise been exhausted by the contractions before we even got to the hard part.

She progressed pretty quickly, more than a centimeter an hour, until one time the doctor is inspecting her, she asks her to push, and we just get started - I didn't even realize this was "it" right away. We learned the mechanics of how to do it, with Marta's feet up in stirrups, the doctor and a nurse between her legs, another nurse on one side, and me on the other, holding her neck and foot and trying to fold her in half.  Marta pushed like a champ, which she attributed to her ballet training.  They actually have a monitor which show the strength of each contraction.  Whenever one came, we'd do three or four pushes to coincide with the peak of the contraction, then maybe a minute of rest, then the next contraction.

I've heard stories about women during childbirth being terrifying forces of nature who will smite anyone who gets in their path.  That's certainly understandable, but Marta was the same old Marta, just fluctuating between intense concentration and effort and exhaustion.  I asked her family to record messages like "spinga signora, spinga!" (push, maam, push!), which I played to her during a few rest periods.  She was in good spirits anyways, but this made her laugh.  She'd previously lamented missing out on the experience of delivering in Italy, where the doctors would say things of encouragement like that, so I hoped this would help.

The baby moved down pretty smoothly until about the point where I could see the top of his head inside the opening - he had long dark hair!  The rest of the delivery was challenging. He apparently had a big head, and Marta is a small woman.  While they weren't able to tell at first, it turned out he was OP (occiput posterior), facing upwards, which makes delivery more challenging.  If you've seen the shape of a newborn's head, it's a sort-of lopsided cone, coming to a point in upper back part.  When they're facing down, they slide out point first, with the face smushed into soft tissue.  Facing up, the cone points at the wrong angle, so they have to go around a curve, with the face smushed into the pelvis.  Progress through this portion was painful and slow, even thought it seemed like he was right there.

Before the pushing started, the fetal heart rate kept slowing, so they'd reposition Marta, which somewhat helped, but it was touchy, and they weren't able to get it back to where they wanted to see it, so I suspect they may have tried to move things along a bit more quickly to get him out as soon as possible.

That last stage of pushing was awful, I could see how exhaused Marta was, and hell, _I_ felt exhausted.  I half wanted us to take a break to recoup, but obviously we couldn't.  At some point I thought we might have to switch to a c-section, though I think that would've been risky still, because it would take a while to prep, and he needed to come out now.  The doctors I think knew that there were risks, and called in a neonatal team to wait to receive the baby, as well as some back-up for the delivery.

At some point, I remember them saying "should we call in Jackie?  Yeah, let's get Jackie in here".  Jackie turned out to be a 50-something Jamaican nurse, who climbed in to bed with Marta and helped her push by bearing down on her stomach like squeezing the last bit of toothpaste out of the tube.  They also tried cutting Marta a bit, and used suction twice.  Things were of course fairly gory from start to finish (I later found errant blood on my clothes), but I found that didn't actually bother me much.  The uncertainties weighed much more heavily.  We still made slow progress for a while.

Eventually, the baby did make it out, and they placed him on Marta's stomach for only a moment to cut the umbilical cord.  Marta cut the cord herself!  I helped by placing her hands in position.  They then whisked Enzo over to the corner and immediately started working on him.  Initially, he was blue grey and didn't cry, breathe, or move his limbs.  They pumped oxygen into him for a bit and shook him around, and some color did start to appear.  Marta meanwhile was nearly out cold and being stitched up.  I was split between the two of them, and there was so much going on in the room I couldn't freely walk back and forth.  There were three people working on the baby, two on Marta, and two on the placenta, which must've been delivered when I was over with the baby.  I later learned from a pediatrician friend that they were probably collecting cord blood for lab tests, which is apparently common practice after difficult deliveries.

They put the baby in an incubator and took him to the NICU, so I went with them and left Marta for the moment.  There were two primary concerns - he had difficulty breathing ("grunting") and high levels of acid build-up, both of which are complications of a difficult delivery.  The neonatologist did say that both issues were transitional, though said that if the acid build-up didn't improve, she'd likely transfer him to another hospital for "cooling", where they lower the body temperature to slow the metabolism.  I didn't tell Marta about that until late the next day.

Once he was situated there, I went back to Marta and hung out with her until she was cleared to go to the postpartum recovery, where we'd stay for two nights.  I fed her apple juice and crumbs of a larabar.  In true Marta fashion, she perked up quickly with a little food and started eating more vociferously.  Soon enough she was smiling and in good spirits again.  We went over to the recovery room - they put us in a pleasant little room with a gorgeous view overlooking Biscayne bay.  We spent the next little while decompressing and updating friends and family.

The rest of that day was hectic, with a near constant influx of people in our room and visits to the newly-named Enzo in the NICU.  I was overwhelmed by the events of the day and wanted mostly to be left alone to care for Marta and stare into space for a while (or at Enzo, when possible).  We did manage to get a decent amount of sleep that night - I slept through a couple of Marta's check-ups even in my uncomfortable recliner.  The next morning was similarly busy, but by mid afternoon things had slowed considerably and we were able to take a breath.

During this time Enzo was being cared for in the NICU, but was doing better each time I saw him.  First they took off the supplemental oxygen, then the tube going into his stomach through the mouth.  Later they opened up the incubator as he was able to regulate his own temperature better.  His acid gas numbers improved as well.  They also started feeding him orally, which he took to well, and so they were able to take out his IV.  He had a lot of bruising on his head from the delivery and some rashes and scratches on his face from that process and from the adhesives holding everything in place.  Initially, his head was swollen and malformed, but the swelling is subsiding and it's going to a more normal shape.  Since they used suction, they needed to perform an ultrasound on his head, but there didn't appear to be any major issues there.  The second night we were able to hold him.  He's expressive and inquisitive - when he's awake, he's constantly working his mouth and sticking his tongue out, while his eyes search the room or stare at me.  When he's sleepy, his eyes will droop and he might give a huge yawn - a wonder to see.  Holding him, I can feel him wriggling around, though he seems to love being swaddled.  We're all wearing masks, because of COVID, and especially in the NICU, so though he's now two days old, he has yet to see a face.

Marta and I are being discharged today, but Enzo will be monitored here for another day or two.  We want him to come home with us, but at least this will give us a little time to make sure the house is fully in order.

Lastly, I wanted to note a few things that were helpful or would have been to prep before going in to labor.  We knew who we were going to contact and when - basically just our immediate families.  We also ignored everyone who reached out when it wasn't convenient for us.  We didn't need anything for labor - I brought a book and a laptop, and Marta watched 30 minutes of an episode of Il Commissario Montalbano, but we were too busy for anything the rest of the time.  I'm glad we had the warm shawl and hat, and we each had sweaters (good, because the hospital was cold).  I should've brought shoes that were a bit more comfortable for extended wear during labor.  We had some snack bars for Marta (for after delivery), which were very handy, and an insulated water bottle.  Marta wore a hospital gown basically the whole time, though she did have another one to throw over it a couple times.  A big fluffy bath towel or terry cloth robe would've been nice for her to shower with.  For me, toiletries and a few changes of clothing was plenty.  Most of the hospital meals were bland as hell, one wouldn't do wrong to pack some salt and hot sauce if there were a surplus of space.  It'd also be wise to figure out the location and hours of on-campus restaurants or cafes for coffee, tea, and treats.
